This programme contains
some strong language.
I'm not one for sentiment.
It's not in my genes,
but I suppose
the occasion deserves it.
It's a year since Adrian went
into that place, which means
that it's a year and two
weeks since Adrian said
he was going to Waitrose,
and then got home a fortnight later,
having lost 2st
and gained a tattoo.
People underestimate the
dietary value of cocaine.
What's the tattoo?
Geronimo.
It looks like Jimmy Krankie.
Where did you lose the two weeks?
Oh, it's not really about
the immediate surroundings
for that stuff. No!
It's about the glamour of it
which, in Adrian's case, meant
a fortnight off his tits
in a Travelodge.
Oh! It was a Premier Inn.
I can't help feeling this speech
has gone off the rails just a bit.
If I was one for sentiment,
then I'd not thank Adrian -
that's a bit much - but
I would acknowledge that,
one way or another, you've
managed to pull yourself up
to somewhere near normality.
I'm glad you got there
and I hope you stay there.
She means stay boring.
Yeah, I do.
So, here's to boring.
ALL: To boring.
Mm. Mmm.
Do you like wine? Yes, it's good.
VOICE FADES: Can I
get anyone coffee?
You're as high as a fucking kite.
It's over.
Obviously.
There's...
There's 100 grand, easy.
Where have you been?
I, er... I couldn't sleep.
Clearly. I went out and
one thing led to another.
But the important thing is
that this was an accident.
I saw an opportunity and I took it.
And this is it - this is
us getting out of the hole.
I wasn't aware that
we were in a hole.
Well, you know, my rehab's
still on the credit cards
and there's another few, um...
HE CLEARS HIS THROAT
Look, this is it - the way out.
We took money out of the
house to pay off the rehab.
But you didn't pay it off
and you've spent that money
because you never stopped.
You're pathetic.
I'll sort myself out, I promise.
This is what I needed -
a clean slate. You've never wanted
for anything in your life, and
that includes clean fucking slates!
This is different. You know,
people like you, you grow up with
so much safety that you
think danger is exciting.
Well, it's not.
It's pain and misery
and desperate men
doing desperate things.
I was thinking that maybe we
could speak to... I'm leaving now.
I'm going upstairs, packing
a bag and I'm leaving.
And I wish you luck.
Because a man like you
in a world like that
is going to need plenty of luck.
I don't... I don't know what to do.
I don't know what to do next.
That's how it starts.
GLASS SHATTERS
SHE BREATHES HEAVILY
DOOR CREAKS
WHISPERS: Go, go, go, go.
Big mistake, buddy.
Big mistake.
Argh! Agh.
HE GROANS
OK.
Listen!
No, no!
GUNSHOT
HE GROANS
HE GASPS
HE COUGHS
MUSIC: F-oldin' Money
by The Fall
# I went to the bank
just to get a little money
# When he told me their requirements
I started feeling funny
# He said, "You ain't got a
house, you ain't got a plot"
# I ain't got a window
and I ain't got a job
# But it takes a lot of
blue-backs to satisfy my honey
# If I could get my hands
on some f-oldin' money
# Well, I went to the social
just to get a little pension
# I was sorely in distress
I was getting some attention
# They said, "You don't get a
copper, you don't get a dime"
# That's why I broke his jaw
# That's why I'm doing time
# But it takes a lot of
blue-backs to satisfy my honey
# If I could get my hands
on some f-oldin' money...
YOUTHS SHOUT
# And then I got a letter
off my lawyer in the city
# He said, "You're gonna come and
see me - boy, it really is a pity"
# Those savings you got
in the casino disappeared
# And he went out the
window real quick, honey
# And I'll do it all again
but it may sound funny. #
HE SNIFFS
I don't have a story.
Not yet.
I sit here and I watch you tell
your stories and I'm grateful,
because you let me sit
here without speaking...
..then count another meeting,
another day.
I've done 100 days and...
..maybe I'm close to one
where I tell a story, too.
Thank you.
How do you do it - sit there
and offer up your worst moments?
Well, offering them up
robs them of something.
I don't think about who
I was before I came here.
Neither do I, but the more
I talk about who I was in there,
the more I leave him in there.
Give it a go when you're ready.
ALARM BEEPS
Nice motor!
It was his pride and joy.
Divorce, you know.
Little victories.
Where are parked?
Er, round the corner.
Maybe sometime we could...
I don't know, meet and do what
people do when they don't drink.
Tea! Oh.
Is that what people do -
meet up for cups of tea? Um...
We-we... We can't meet up, um,
not away from here.
Oh, right, um...
It's sort of, um,
sort of frowned upon.
Yeah, I get it.
Yeah. You can call me, if you like.
Um, I'm only just
in the door myself,
in the grand scheme of things,
but... I'd like that.
See you later. See you.
I'll bring that back.
It is important, Roy, to
recognise that things have changed.
Very good.
I accept the fall.
The fall was deserved.
Perhaps, at some level,
the fall was needed.
What I cannot accept is how
far it is being suggested
that I have fallen.
It's disproportionate.
It's not right.
I see.
Because there's another
way it could have gone.
A way where I would have
barely fallen at all,
but others would have, Roy.
You would have,
but I didn't pursue that option.
I kept quiet.
I sat in that cell
for two years with...
..a lunatic for company,
and kept quiet.
And so I'm asking you,
with respect,
to soften the fall.
Two years.
The game's crooked.
I'm a lawyer.
Well...
Now, you're out
and wounded, and bitter,
and greedy.
This is not greed.
It is many things,
but it is not greed.
I've already granted you
the greatest favour I can.
I have allowed you to continue
to breathe the rich air of Edinburgh
and you'll continue to do
so as long as you're...
Ha. ...irrelevant.
Just...
..need a piece...
..of what I had, of who
I was - just a piece.
And I can get myself
back from there.
No matter who you are, Max...
..you come out of there
and you find that your old
life has run for the hills.
Except that it hasn't run
very far, though, has it?
I mean, this was my business.
And you owe me for this,
for everything.
HE SCOFFS
Even if that were true,
I can't engage with you.
Not now that I'm legit.
Not now that you're
dirtier than ever.
You are still falling, Max.
You have yet to land.
And if you're looking
for salvation...
..you should aim a little lower.
Damage.
The damage you do...
I wasn't exactly
spared damage myself.
How was it?
It was dispiriting.
Jake?
Chicago. That's where the keys
came from, anyway. To his flat.
Where, astonishingly,
I currently reside.
No note?
Keys were the note.
Kenny, you once suggested to me
that we work together as partners.
It's a cause of not
inconsiderable surprise
that that idea now
makes a sort of sense.
On a business level.
And...on another.
I feel guilt, Kenny.
For the way I treated you.
This is a chance to rectify that.
I've heard you're doing OK.
Now it's time for
you to do even better.
Let me tell you how I've
spent the last two years.
A morning meeting.
The day's graft.
And evenings at Sighthill College.
Now I'm two years dry, I get
the kids every other Saturday
and I've got an HND
in legal services
which, as you and I both know,
means I'm licensed to
produce legal documents.
And you're not.
You're disbarred.
So you want to produce legal
documents on my license,
that's all this is.
There's no guilt.
That's not an emotion
you would entertain.
The HND leaves you somewhat
lacking in legal expertise,
which is why you're working
out of a shithole in Leith
and have made the
catastrophic decision
to name your business
Burns Investigations.
It's my name.
It sounds a little niche.
Oh, we've had the
odd misunderstanding.
Still living in Pilton?
Hamilton Borders.
Remember this moment, Kenny.
This is when your life turns.
Me and you.
Legal services for the
good people of Leith.
Your licence, my knowledge.
Start small, get bigger.
And get out of Pilton.
If you're working under my license,
you're working under me.
With you.
As partners.
This is your last resort, isn't it?
Coming here.
And it's you all over, Max.
Thinking too much of yourself
and too little of me.
What are you saying, Kenny?
I'm saying you're right.
This place needs a bit of work.
So maybe that's where we start.
A wee...trial run.
Good. That'll do you now.
MUSIC BLARES FROM UPSTAIRS
HE SCREAMS IN FRUSTRATION
Fuuuuck!
PHONE RINGS
TV PLAYS LOUDLY
Yeah?
Did you do it?
I did.
So you're serious.
Yeah.
I never thought I'd
see you like this, Max.
I share your surprise.
MUSIC BLARES UPSTAIRS
HE SIGHS
I want a better life.
I can give you it.
You'd be working for me.
I'll be working for you.
PHONE RINGS
Hello?
Dad? How are you?
Well...
I'm calling you.
It's good to hear from you.
Shame about the circumstances.
You're hearing from me
because of the circumstances.
Tell me about Adrian's family.
They gave up on him.
Few rehabs ago.
But I presume they'll
come looking eventually.
A police detective will file
a missing persons report
which will say that
Adrian left suddenly.
That he had a troubled private life.
That he took his passport,
emptied his account
and was sighted at the airport.
And why would a policeman do that?
Because I'll suggest he does.
Tell your friends he relapsed,
you kicked him out.
You're sad, but it's
hardly the first time,
and you've got to move on.
And what about...
..the other one?
He has a regimental tattoo
and smells like a brewery.
Ex-Army, full of
drink and owns a gun.
We can make that look...
..the way people would
expect it to look.
The money?
I don't want it.
Not like that you don't.
But cleaned up, legitimate,
it becomes something else.
It becomes enough to
repair the damage he's done.
And to give you a
break from men like him.
I don't want it.
And I don't need it.
Really?
I heard about your business.
And cocaine's expensive.
This isn't going to be what
you hope it's going to be.
I've managed without
you for a long time.
How's that working out?
I couldn't help noticing
when I was down there...
..that the other one hasn't
been dead as long as Adrian.
Are we finished?
Go to bed.
There will be some coming and
going, but you stay up there.
It'll be daylight in three hours.
Give it four for safety.
Then come downstairs
and this is all gone.
A new day.
Thanks.
For calling me.
I don't know anyone else
who does what you do.
You won't believe me, but...
..I don't do this any more.
# The birds they sang
# At the break of day
# Start again
# I heard them say
# Don't dwell
# On what has passed away
# Or what is yet to be
# Ring the bell
# It still can ring
# Forget your perfect offering
# There is a crack
# A crack in everything
# That's how the light gets in... #
Thursdays.
They were the problem.
Because on Thursdays,
I work the same shift as my ex
and I should pick him up.
She's this New-Agey sociopath
so she seemed to think
we were fucking mates or something.
She would always slip
something into the conversation,
and I'd miss it at the time.
Then that night, it would
grow and grow inside me.
And...the only way to...
So I drank.
Then Thursdays got so bad
that, on Friday, I had to drink
just to get past them.
Then the fear of Thursday
took down Wednesday,
but that was a case of
Wednesday, Thursday, Friday.
Less than half the week.
Then my colleague
got promoted over me.
That made Mondays hard.
Going back to that.
So Monday went.
The thought of it took
down Sunday and, I mean...
Tuesday was just sort of hanging
around feeling sorry for herself,
so I put that out its misery.
So that's six days. Not great.
But it was OK.
Because of Saturday.
I ran on Saturdays.
Up Arthur's Seat -
it's, like, ten miles.
Then I came home and I cleaned
and I washed, and I slept.
And it was safe.
Then one Saturday, I was
at the top of Arthur's Seat,
looking out over the city and...
..feeling halfway
good about myself.
And there she was.
My ex's wife.
Tits and Lycra with not
a drop of sweat on her,
and talking about the
healing power of clouds.
And that was Saturday gone.
That was when... That was
when I started drinking in...
..in a way that I had to
take me somewhere, and...
..I'm glad.
I'm glad it took me here.
Thank you.
APPLAUSE
Feel good?
Yeah.
Particularly when I
got to slag her off.
Hmm. That's what this
place is all about.
Slagging folk off and shit coffee.
SHE GIGGLES
Ah, Christ!
Maybe we can meet up, you know?
Not here. Really? I...
Look, I'll be fine.
"Fine"?
Good.
It would be good!
If you put down your deposit...
CONVERSATION CONTINUES
There we go, Max. Honest toil.
Nothing like it.
The work is its own reward.
Conan Doyle said that.
Did you know he grew up in
a flat on Picardy Place?
Yeah. There's a rather
large statue outside of it.
Now, I was thinking
our priorities...
Oh, here we are.
Right. Thought I'd do my
bit to kick us off.
A niche.
That's what we need.
Something to get people's
attention, get them in the door.
And I landed on...
..a brilliant niche.
Wills.
Wills?
£99.99 - a hundred quid will.
Can you imagine it?
It's a hard thing to imagine?
Well, that's just to get them
in the door. You see?
Because when people
think about their wills,
that's when it all comes
tumbling out.
Estrangements, kaput
marriages, money disputes.
So they hear about
our deal on wills, right?
They come in, they take a card...
..and soon enough,
they're back for more.
More paperwork for you to draw up.
A wee bit of the old
investigatory for me.
What...
HE CLEARS THROAT
What's going on here, Kenny?
That's an owl.
I see the owls.
I'd struggle not to see the owls.
The owl, as you should really know,
was the Roman symbol of justice.
They'd have them...
They'd have them caged
in their courtrooms,
which is a wee bit
cruel, right enough but...
My issue with the owls is
that they are so plentiful.
Now, now, Max.
Let's stay positive.
Conan Doyle grew up on a
one-bedder with no shoes on his feet
and a dad in the Royal Asylum,
and look where he got to.
It's a terrible thing, getting old.
All the things you
thought were dealt with,
they come back stronger
just as you get weaker.
And maybe that's it.
Maybe I'm going soft.
Either way, you're right, Max.
I owe you.
A lot of men lose their nerve
in that place, but you didn't. So...
A wee gesture.
And, err...
..a bigger one.
Clean it.
Take your usual cut.
Give it back.
Thought you were legit.
I am. That's why I'm here.
What's this come from?
I'm...I'm not involved in this.
You're looking well, son.
Considering what happened the
last time you were in my vicinity.
Let's keep you looking well.
This isn't help.
Roy...
..this is something else.
I just haven't worked out what yet.
Clean it and give it back.
We're not doing it.
I can clean it in a day.
Our cut would be the first
step to setting up properly.
Up town.
This isn't what this
is going to be, Max.
Me, you - this place isn't
going to be this. I agree.
And it won't be, after this.
The thing about Roy asking
you to do something
is that he isn't really asking.
If he's legit then
the money isn't his.
This looks like the kind of money
that people'll come looking for.
Well, you can't lose.
We clean it or we
get caught with it.
Well, whoever's money it is,
they don't know it's missing yet.
How'd you know that?
Because they're not here.
It's a tracker.
So why don't we see
who comes looking for it?
TV BLARES
PHONE RINGS
HE MUTES TV
Hey!
There's debt I didn't know about.
He's been forging my signature.
Well, at least he had one talent.
If it's safe, I'll take it.
I thought you might.
It's in motion.
How are you doing?
Leith Legals?
Should be busy. You'd think so.
Are you done?
Yeah.
How clean is it?
Spotless.
Send it here.
Not directly.
I know how it works,
I invented how it works.
You're running your
own messages now?
Do you like Westerns, Max?
No? Escape.
That's what they've been
for me since I was a boy.
At the Alhambra.
The foot of the Walk.
Sunday double-bill.
The good stuff, you know?
John Ford, Howard Hawks.
Men that knew their
way around a story.
And I still escape
into these stories,
just like at the Alhambra.
Last night, I couldn't.
Because I kept thinking,
why did you ask me that?
Why did you ask me
where the money was from
when you know how it works?
That was because of him.
Kenny.
It's his license.
I feel...
Ach, I don't know -
I feel responsible for him,
I suppose, to a degree.
Not many men go inside
and come out better.
Well, I couldn't
have come out worse.
Where is he?
AA. So that's what's wrong with him.
I mean, you should've
seen him before.
Do you trust him?
More than I trust you.
DOOR CLOSES
If I'd walked past this
place a few months ago
and seen us sitting here like this,
I'd have thought,
"You fucking bitch."
Sitting here fresh as a
daisy with a peppermint tea
and a good-looking bloke
while I walk to work
because I'm too scared to drive.
I used to feel sorry for people.
Normal people.
I convinced myself they were
all living these empty lives.
Like, I'd be walking about half-cut,
freezing cold because I lost
my jacket three pubs back.
Trying to find the bus fare home.
"Look at all these poor bastards
with their boring lives
"and their nice, warm jackets."
I have to go to work. Same.
Legal services, common practice.
Right.
You don't have to, um...
We...we share what we want to share.
I'd like to do this again.
So would I.
DOORBELL RINGS
The thing about blind trusts...
Do you have a card?
Blind trusts are supposed to
stop conflicts of interest
to maintain purity and honour.
But the law is no
match for humanity.
And so there is another
form of blind trust.
Which is about diversion,
confusion, building a maze.
That's what they tried to
do with your blind trust,
but they didn't do it very well,
which is why I know it's yours.
I have no idea what
you're talking about.
You're the sole beneficiary
of a blind trust stuck together
by a bunch of hack lawyers working
for a man called Roy Lynch.
I see.
Is he an associate of yours?
No, he's not.
I didn't think so.
Is your husband home?
No.
I used to have a house like this.
They come with pressure.
The kind of pressure that
might lead your husband
into hiding things in your name.
The kind of pressure that
might send him to Roy Lynch.
We're separated.
This is my house.
So tell me, in what capacity
are you here in my house
asking me these things?
I'm setting up the trust.
This is my due diligence, making
sure everything's above board.
Should I speak to the police?
Lothian Police?
Christ, they couldn't get
a cat out of a tree!
HE FORCES A LAUGHS
No, no, no. I'll, eh,
sort this out myself.
You're a long way from Leith.
And your owl sanctuary.
My partner designed those cards.
He's an alcoholic.
Thanks for your time.
# What moves you
to act the way you are?
to fall into their arms?
# What moves you
to wish each other harm?
to act the way you are?
# What moves
when you beat each other down?
when you act the way you are?
# What moves you to
fall into their arms?
beat each other down? #
MUSIC CONTINUES
You diddle me with your dealing.
I don't know how you do it,
but you diddle me.
I called him.
Dad.
I saw him. I'm sorry.
You must have been desperate.
It won't happen again.
Just because I don't
have anything to do with him
doesn't mean you shouldn't.
He's got his uses.
I don't. It was just...
It won't happen again.
But you'll be pleased to
hear that Adrian's gone.
Oh.
How can you tell me that, love,
and expect my old heart to take it?
He wasn't...wasn't a
bad man under it all.
Under the trousers.
What kind of Scotsman
rises in the morning
and decides that
his very best option
is to spend the day cutting about
town in a pair of red trousers?
Well, I'm happy you're happy.
It's all right to aim upwards, love.
God knows I wish I had,
but you don't have
to settle for that.
Can you move in
with me now, Mum? No.
Here, I'm just about bearable.
There, I'd be a pain in the arse.
It won't happen again.
Can you write these up, Yvonne?
Sorry, I've been up
to my ears all day.
I'll be here all night.
Well, that'll keep
you out of trouble.
How's it going,
with the other thing?
Fine, thanks.
And you're being careful?
Well, in this job, anything
like that, any weakness,
folk can use it against you.
I'm aware of that, Stevie.
I'm being careful.
Well done, pal.
I'm...I'm proud of you.
It's safe, anonymous.
Withdraw what you need
when you need to.
Who's done this?
My team.
A lot of demand for blind
trusts in Leith, is there?
We're not in Leith any more.
But it's not...
..what it was, it's...it's
legal work, uptown.
We've got a view of the castle.
From the toilet window,
right enough,
but it's a view all the same.
You're not taking my money.
You're getting something out of him,
a silver lining,
for what he took from you,
for what he made you do.
I spent so much time trying
to get away from you.
And here I fucking am.
Growing up in this city
with my name...
..if you've been a boy,
you'd have maybe been proud,
or a wee bit gallus with it,
but you were embarrassed.
You thought running away from
me would make life easier,
but you got that backwards.
You should have embraced who I am.
Because that's who you are.
People used to say to me,
"Do you wish you had a boy
to pass it onto?" But...
..but it's not about
sons and daughters.
It's deeper than that.
It's about what's inside.
And you're forged from steel, Erin.
I saw it in you from
when you were a wee girl.
And I see it now.
And I saw it when I was down
those stairs back there,
thinking about what I told
you when you were young,
that we don't call the police
and how that's still
there inside you.
You are me.
And I'm getting old.
And there is a kingdom.
And it requires an heir.
Thanks for the money.
I'm watching you, son.
Sorry? I'm watching you.
Scouting around,
picking off stragglers.
What are you suggesting?
It's the weak ones, isn't it?
I mean, we're all weak,
but even then,
I saw you hitting Moira's yesterday.
She's half cooked wi' dementia.
What can you be peddling
that's going to help her?
I'm not peddling anything.
I'm offering a highly
attractive property investment
that will offer financial security
to some of your fellow residents.
The new flats at Leith.
They're yours to sell, are they?
Yeah.
Which means I'm busy.
Which means wind
your fucking neck in.
Best of luck to you, son.
MUSIC: Tastes Good With The Money
by Fat White Family
DOG BARKS
# Ornamental kindness
# Heats both of my hands
# Ooh, ooh
# It tastes good with the money
# Tried to figure my way home
# Via the Hollywood Hills
# Mm, mm
# It tastes good with the money. #
Is he still here?
What do you think?
What's that?
Well, he's filed a missing person
but he's cocked up the registration.
Hmm. Been too long out
the trenches, that one.
What's he doing his
own filing for, anyway?
I don't know. Here.
I'll enter it again.
How'd he get it?
The DI position over you.
He used what he had.
# It tastes good with the money
# I'll never look at a tower block
# The same way again
# Mm, mm
# It tastes good with the money
# And one more faith
# Bursting into flames
# The air up there
Now fresh and clean... #
He'd no' have done it.
Suicide.
Coward's way out.
He wisnae a coward.
That's what I'm saying!
# Sketching ruins in the dark. #
HE PANTS
Nice dog.
In 1588, a ship from the
Spanish Armada was wrecked on Skye,
and the only survivors
were three white dogs.
Clan Donald took them, fed them,
kept them away from
the local mongrels
and bred them for centuries.
They called them
West Highland Terriers,
and they kept them
a secret for 200 years.
You can keep anything secret
if you work hard enough.
Someone told me yesterday
I wasn't capable of guilt.
And he was right.
Feelings like that -
guilt, love, happiness -
they don't touch the sides.
I've always needed something...
..more, something deeper.
When I was young, it was fear.
Fear of being found out,
being discovered in worlds
I didn't belong in,
I didn't have the breeding for.
Then fear turned to greed.
And that did a decent
job for me, too.
In prison,
those first few weeks...
..I was lost.
I was twisting in the wind.
I tried guilt, don't get me wrong.
How could I not?
Late at night,
lying in a cell in the dark,
you'll try anything.
But it didn't work,
because guilt's about looking back
and what I needed,
what I've always needed
is something that can help me now.
Something to drive me.
Something to grant me purpose.
Because a man like me...
..he needs something to draw on.
A man like me, he needs some...
..heavy fuel.
And then you came to see me.
And I found it.
What I needed.
Thank God.
I found it.
Revenge.
It's revenge.
MUSIC: Into The Valley
by The Skids
# Into the valley
# Betrothed and divine
# Realisation's no virtue
# But who can define
# Why soldiers go marching?
# Those masses in line
# This disease is catching
# From victory to stone
# Ahoy! Ahoy!
# Land, sea and sky
# Boy, man and soldier
# Ahoy! Ahoy!
Deceived and then punctured. #